docs(zone-sdk): decentralized sequencers (#2929)
logos-co/nomos-node: zone-sdk/DECENTRALIZED_SEQUENCING.md

# Decentralized Sequencing for Channels

> A user guide for zone developers using the Zone SDK to operate a channel with multiple sequencers taking turns to publish.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A user guide for zone developers using the Zone SDK to operate a channel with multiple sequencers, with round-robin style publish slot windows.
```

## What "decentralized sequencing" means here

> A **channel** on Bedrock can be operated by a single sequencer (centralized) or by a committee of accredited sequencers that take turns publishing inscriptions (decentralized). The on-chain rotation is enforced by Bedrock itself: at any block slot, exactly one accredited key is *authorized* to write, derived deterministically from the channel's configuration plus the current slot. Other sequencers' inscriptions in that slot are rejected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A **channel** on Bedrock can be operated by a single sequencer (centralized) or by a committee of accredited sequencers that await their slot windows to publish inscriptions (decentralized). The on-chain rotation is enforced by Bedrock itself: at any block slot, exactly one accredited key is *authorized* to write, derived deterministically from the channel's configuration plus the current slot. Other sequencers' inscriptions in that slot are rejected.
```

The rotation-relevant fields on [`ChannelState`](https://app.notion.com/p/nomos-tech/1-5-0-Mantle-33d261aa09df8051b0d0cd4d5ddade85?source=copy_link#22b261aa09df8289a3f281de4aa8fdca):

| Field                       | Purpose                                                              |
| --------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `accredited_keys`           | Ordered list of `Ed25519PublicKey`s authorized to write or co-sign config changes. The round-robin index references positions in this list. |
| `posting_timeframe`         | Length (in slots) of each sequencer's turn before rotation moves to the next index. |
| `posting_timeout`           | Per-turn timeout used by the on-chain validator to advance rotation past an inactive sequencer. (See the Mantle spec for the full algorithm.) |
| `configuration_threshold`   | Minimum number of accredited-key signatures needed to update channel config. |
| `tip_message`               | The current channel-tip `MsgId`. New inscriptions must parent here. |

These fields are read by the on-chain `round_robin(slot)` function to compute who is authorized at any given slot.

> 

Reviewer: **Note:** If both `posting_timeframe` and `posting_timeout` are `0`, only the first accredited key will be allowed to publish inscriptions without any slot window constraints.

## Round-robin rotation

The Zone SDK currently supports **round-robin** as the rotation scheme. Other scheduling mechanisms (e.g., First-Write-Wins) may be added later; for now, every decentralized channel rotates round-robin.

> Round-robin assigns turns in order through the `accredited_keys` list. Each sequencer holds its turn for `posting_timeframe` slots before rotation advances to the next index, wrapping back to 0 after the last sequencer. If the authorized sequencer fails to publish for `posting_timeout` slots, the on-chain validator advances rotation past it so the channel does not stall on an inactive participant. The Mantle spec is the source of truth for the exact algorithm.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Round-robin assigns turns in order through the `accredited_keys` list. In a _normal_ 
setup, each sequencer holds its turn for `posting_timeframe` slots before rotation 
advances to the next index, wrapping back to 0 after the last sequencer. 

A busy channel will have cadence (turn-to-write rotation) every `posting_timeframe` 
slots. With silence, the current turn-to-write can be extended up to `posting_timeout` slots, 
after which the cadence will change to `posting_timeout` slots, until some sequencer 
publish in turn, then cadence will be reset to `posting_timeframe` slots again.

We also have some caveats: 
**Non-zero cases**
- `posting_timeout > posting_timeframe`: as discussed above - cadence is governed 
   by timeframe only until first timeout threshold is reached; after that, timeout 
   branch has priority, so effective cadence is governed by timeout windows (until a 
   write resets baseline).
- `0 < posting_timeout < posting_timeframe`: cadence is governed by timeout slots 
  (timeout branch dominates as soon as it can fire).
**Zero cases**
- `posting_timeframe > 0`, `posting_timeout = 0`: cadence is governed by timeframe 
  slots.
- `posting_timeframe = 0`, `posting_timeout > 0`: cadence is governed by timeout 
  slots.
- `posting_timeframe = 0`, `posting_timeout  = 0`: no automatic cadence; current 
  leader (tip_sequencer) stays forever unless external state update changes it.

**Note:** The Mantle spec is the source of truth for the exact algorithm.
```

> A worked example: a channel with three accredited keys and `posting_timeframe = 2` rotates as

Reviewer: `posting_timeframe = 2` is not a practical example, it has to be >= the average slot-per-block value. We do not control when during the current block's slot time frame a mempool will propose inscriptions for the leader. With only 2 slots and 10 sequencers all of them will get time-to-write in every single block with duration 20 slot ticks.

Reviewer: All worked examples in this document should consider the practical angle.

            "Our turn until slot {:?}",
            notification.ends_at_slot,
        );
    } else {
        println!(
            "Waiting for our turn; current authorized window ends at {:?}",
            notification.ends_at_slot,
        );
    }
}
```

### Snapshot: `SequencerChannelView`

The full view is updated on every block; subscribers can `borrow()` the current value at any time without waiting. Best for rendering a status panel.

```rust
let view_rx = sequencer.subscribe_channel_view();
let view = view_rx.borrow().clone();
if view.our_turn_to_write {
    // Authorized right now.
} else if let (Some(own), Some(auth)) = (view.own_key_index, view.authorized_key_index) {
    println!(
        "Sequencer {} is publishing; we are sequencer {}.",
        auth, own,
    );
}
```

The view carries `pending_publish_txs` and `queued_messages` so the UI can show how many inscriptions are waiting for our next turn.

## Adding and removing sequencers

The committee is changed by submitting a `ChannelConfig` op — same primitive used during channel creation. Two flows exist depending on the current `configuration_threshold`.

### Single-admin: `configuration_threshold == 1`

> The current sole admin can rotate in / out other sequencers, set the rotation parameters, and adjust thresholds in one call:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently only the signing key at the first index (`keys[0]`) - the channel administrator key - is authorized (hard-coded) to change the channel configuration. The `ChannelConfigOp` operation overwrites the entire key list - include the admin key at the first index again if it should remain authorized as the channel administrator key.
```

let new_keys = Keys::from(vec![
    admin_pk,
    new_sequencer_b_pk,
    new_sequencer_c_pk,
]);

let (result, checkpoint, signed_tx) = sequencer.handle().channel_config(
    new_keys,
    SlotTimeframe::from(2),   // 2 slots per turn
    SlotTimeout::from(10),    // skip after 10 slots of inactivity
    1,                         // configuration_threshold (still single-admin)
    1,                         // withdraw_threshold
)?;
```

`channel_config` builds, signs (with the local key only), and submits the tx atomically. On finalization, the SDK's `refresh_channel_state` picks up the new config and the next `BlocksProcessed` event recomputes `our_turn_to_write` for every running sequencer.

### Multi-admin: `configuration_threshold > 1` (not yet wired)

When the channel has been moved to a threshold larger than 1, `handle.channel_config` is no longer sufficient — it only signs with the local key. The SDK exposes the lower-level primitives but **does not orchestrate signature collection across sequencers**; the committee transport (how the unsigned tx and the signatures are exchanged) is the application's responsibility.

> The flow mirrors the multi-sig withdraw flow described in [`BRIDGING.md`](BRIDGING.md#multi-sequencer-zones): one sequencer proposes by calling `prepare_tx` with a `ChannelConfigOp` payload, distributes the unsigned tx to the rest of the committee, each co-signer calls `sign_tx`, the proposer assembles a `ChannelMultiSigProof` from the collected `IndexedSignature`s, and submits via `submit_signed_tx`.

Reviewer: Just noting that the bridging document references (example `[`BRIDGING.md`](BRIDGING.md#multi-sequencer-zones)`) have to be checked when that document has been added to the repo.

```rust
use lb_core::mantle::{
    Op, SignedMantleTx,
    ops::{OpProof, channel::config::ChannelConfigOp},
};
use lb_core::proofs::channel_multi_sig_proof::{ChannelMultiSigProof, IndexedSignature};

// 1. Read this sequencer's index from the channel view.
let view = sequencer.subscribe_channel_view().borrow().clone();
let own_key_index = view.own_key_index.ok_or("not an accredited key")?;

// 2. Build the unsigned config tx and get this sequencer's own signature.
let config = ChannelConfigOp {

>     channel_id,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    channel,
```

    keys: new_keys,
    posting_timeframe,
    posting_timeout,
    configuration_threshold,
    withdraw_threshold,
};
let (tx, msg_id, own_sig) = sequencer.handle().prepare_tx(
    [Op::ChannelConfig(config)].into(),
    inscription_payload,
)?;

// 3. Distribute `tx` to the rest of the committee, collect their
//    `IndexedSignature`s. Transport is application-defined.
let signatures: Vec<IndexedSignature> = collect_signatures_from_committee(
    &tx,
    IndexedSignature::new(own_key_index, own_sig.clone()),
).await?;

// 4. Assemble the threshold proof and submit.
let config_proof = ChannelMultiSigProof::new(signatures)?;
let signed_tx = SignedMantleTx::new(
    tx,
    vec![
        OpProof::ChannelMultiSigProof(config_proof),
        OpProof::Ed25519Sig(own_sig),
    ],
)?;
let (result, checkpoint) = sequencer
    .handle()
    .submit_signed_tx(signed_tx, msg_id)?;
```

> The multi-admin flow is not currently exercised by integration tests; treat it as the reference path until SDK support lands.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The multi-admin flow is not currently exercised by integration tests (see `tests/cucumber_tests/features/zone.feature` in the repo); treat it as the reference path until SDK support lands.
```

  with no slot window constraints. The configuration must be updated to change this.

**Note:** The Mantle spec is the source of truth for the exact algorithm.

### Sizing `posting_timeframe` and `posting_timeout`

`posting_timeframe` must be **at least the average slots-per-block** of the host chain. A turn shorter than one block means multiple sequencers can become authorized within the same block (since a block-producing leader picks up whatever the mempool has at proposal time), defeating the purpose of rotation. As a rule of thumb pick a multiple — e.g. with a ~20 slots/block average, use `posting_timeframe = 60` to give each sequencer roughly three blocks of "owned" leadership per turn.

`posting_timeout` should be ≥ `posting_timeframe`. Smaller values dominate the rotation cadence the moment the authorized sequencer goes silent (see the zero/non-zero cases above).

### Worked example

A channel with three accredited keys, `posting_timeframe = 60`, and `posting_timeout = 180` (so a silent sequencer is skipped after three full turn windows of inactivity):

```
slots 0–59     → index 0
slots 60–119   → index 1
slots 120–179  → index 2
slots 180–239  → index 0
...
```

> If index 1's turn elapses without a publish, the on-chain validator advances past it once the `posting_timeout` window is reached, so index 2 becomes authorized without waiting for the full `posting_timeframe` to expire.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If index 1's turn elapses without a publish, the on-chain validator advances past it once the `posting_timeout` window is reached.
```

            "Our turn until slot {:?}",
            notification.ends_at_slot,
        );
    } else {
        println!(
            "Waiting for our turn; current authorized window ends at {:?}",
            notification.ends_at_slot,
        );
    }
}
```

### Snapshot: `SequencerChannelView`

The full view is updated on every block; subscribers can `borrow()` the current value at any time without waiting. Best for rendering a status panel.

```rust
let view_rx = sequencer.subscribe_channel_view();
let view = view_rx.borrow().clone();
if view.our_turn_to_write {
    // Authorized right now.
} else if let (Some(own), Some(auth)) = (view.own_key_index, view.authorized_key_index) {
    println!(
        "Sequencer {} is publishing; we are sequencer {}.",
        auth, own,
    );
}
```

The view carries `pending_publish_txs` and `queued_messages` so the UI can show how many inscriptions are waiting for our next turn.

## Adding and removing sequencers

The committee is changed by submitting a `ChannelConfig` op — same primitive used during channel creation. Two flows exist depending on the current `configuration_threshold`.

### Single-admin: `configuration_threshold == 1`

> Currently only the signing key at the first index (`keys[0]`) - the channel administrator key - is authorized (hard-coded) to change the channel configuration. The `ChannelConfigOp` operation overwrites the entire key list - include the admin key at the first index again if it should remain authorized as the channel administrator key.

Reviewer 2: I think we are mixing the old design in here. This "first-index-is-admin" behaviour is gone now.

```suggestion
## Adding and removing sequencers

The committee is changed by submitting a `ChannelConfig` op — same primitive used during channel creation. Currently only the single signer flow is supported through the SDK, but we outline both flows here.

### Single-signer: `configuration_threshold == 1`

When `configuration_threshold == 1`, a single valid signature from any one of the channel's accredited keys authorizes a configuration change. Because `ChannelConfigOp` overwrites the entire key list, re-include any keys that should remain accredited after the update.
```

Reviewer 2: cc @hansieodendaal since I see you introduced this bit, i think you still have the old model cached

Reviewer: @davidrusu thanks for fixing that.

@pradovic I think we have to sanitize the code in two places:
- `async fn sign_channel_set_key(` in "services/wallet/src/lib.rs:619" still use `let authorized_key = channel.accredited_keys[0]; // First key is authorized key (guaranteed non-empty)`
- `pub fn channel_config(` in "zone-sdk/src/sequencer/handle.rs:128" still has a stale doc comment about
   ```rust
    /// The sequencer's signing key must be the channel administrator
    /// (`keys[0]`). This ...
   ```

Author: @hansieodendaal Unless I am missing something I think we are only supporting overwriting the set key with single accredited key so this is ok? I agree with the stale doc comment. But anyway, let's fix it in the separate PR
